REGIONAL ANESTHESIA AND ACUTE PAIN

SPECIAL ARTICLE

The Third American Society of Regional Anesthesia and
Pain Medicine Practice Advisory on Local Anesthetic
Systemic Toxicity
Executive Summary 2017

Joseph M. Neal, MD,* Michael J. Barrington, MBBS, FANZCA, PhD,† Michael R. Fettiplace, MD, PhD,‡§
Marina Gitman, MD,§ Stavros G. Memtsoudis, MD, PhD,|| Eva E. Mörwald, MD,||
Daniel S. Rubin, MD,** and Guy Weinberg, MD§††

Abstract: The American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Med-
icine's Third Practice Advisory on local anesthetic systemic toxicity is an
interim update from its 2010 advisory. The advisory focuses on new infor-
mation regarding the mechanisms of lipid resuscitation, updated frequency
estimates, the preventative role of ultrasound guidance, changes to case
presentation patterns, and limited information related to local infiltration
anesthesia and liposomal bupivacaine. In addition to emerging information,
the advisory updates recommendations pertaining to prevention, recognition,
and treatment of local anesthetic systemic toxicity.

What’s New in This Update? This interim update summarizes recent
scientific findings that have enhanced our understanding of the mechanisms
that lead to lipid emulsion reversal of LAST, including rapid partitioning, di-
rect inotropy, and post-conditioning. Since the previous practice advisory,
epidemiological data have emerged that suggest a lower frequency of
LAST as reported by single institutions and some registries, nevertheless
a considerable number of events still occur within the general community.
Contemporary case reports suggest a trend toward delayed presentation,
which may mirror the increased use of ultrasound guidance (fewer intra-
vascular injections), local infiltration techniques (slower systemic uptake),
and continuous local anesthetic infusions. Small patient size and sarcopenia
are additional factors that increase potential risk for LAST. An increasing
number of reported events occur outside of the traditional hospital setting
and involve non-anesthesiologists.

(Reg Anesth Pain Med 2018;43: 113–123)

I nterventions involving local anesthetics are ubiquitous through-

out medicine and are performed by anesthesiologists, other
physicians, dentists, and paramedical personnel. Local anesthetic
systemic toxicity (LAST) remains a serious adverse event despite
advances in prevention, detection, and treatment. Such events range
across a continuum from mild subjective prodromal symptoms
to seizure, cardiac arrest, and/or death. As noted in our previous

From the *Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA; †St Vincent's Hospital,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia; ‡Massachusetts General Hospi-
tal, Boston, MA; §College of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago; ||Hospital
for Special Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY; **University
of Chicago; and ††Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL.
Accepted for publication November 15, 2017.
Address correspondence to: Joseph M. Neal, MD, 1100 Ninth Ave (B2-AN),

Seattle, WA 98111 (e‐mail: Joseph.Neal@virginiamason.org).

G.W. is an officer, director, shareholder and paid consultant of ResQ Pharma,
Inc. He also created and maintains www.lipidrescue.org, an educational
web site. The authors otherwise declare no potential conflict of interest.

This article discusses an off-label use of lipid emulsion (eg, Intralipid) for

treatment of local anesthetic systemic toxicity.

Copyright © 2018 by American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain

Medicine
ISSN: 1098-7339
DOI: 10.1097/AAP.0000000000000720

practice advisory, “a variety of factors influence the likelihood
and severity of LAST, including individual patient risk factors,
concurrent medications, location and technique of block, specific
local anesthetic compound, total local anesthetic dose (the product
of concentration x volume), timeliness of detection, and adequacy
of treatment.”1 The overall rarity of LAST and the fact that epi-
sodes can occur despite proper technique argue strongly for edu-
cation and preparedness among all professionals who administer
local anesthetics to their patients.

The American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Med-
icine (ASRA) convened its first Conference on Local Anesthetic
Toxicity in 2001 coinciding with initial clinical experience after
release of the levo-enantiomers ropivacaine and l-bupivacaine,
plus emerging laboratory observations on the effectiveness of
lipid emulsion as an antidote for LAST. In 2008, a second advi-
sory panel met to develop a rational approach for treatment2 and
to assimilate information on the history, mechanisms, prevention,
and detection of LAST.1,3–7 Consistent with ASRA's commitment
to update its practice advisories as new knowledge emerges, in
2015, the board of directors commissioned a small group of cur-
rent researchers to develop this third advisory. In compliance with
calls from medical journal editors to focus practice advisory
updates on new information,8 we herein present developing
knowledge on the mechanisms of lipid resuscitation, new insights
into incidence and epidemiology, evolving patterns of case pre-
sentation, and revised treatment protocols.

This executive summary condenses information and recom-
mendations from supporting articles that have been published
recently9 or concurrently as part of this practice advisory.10–13
Practitioners are encouraged to read these articles to understand
the basis underlying our recommendations.

METHODS

Individual supporting articles provide details relevant to the
sources accessed to derive their analysis and recommendations.
In general, standard medical literature search engines and article
cross-referencing were used to identify animal and human studies,
case reports and series, and epidemiologic information. The focus
was on new publications and developments since our 2010 advisory.
The panel consisted of recognized experts in LAST and/or
guideline development and includes the authors of this article.
The ASRA provided standard travel reimbursement for members
of the advisory group who met in Chicago on March 26, 2016. No
panelist was paid for their participation, nor did ASRA receive
external funds to support the advisory process.

The second ASRA practice advisory sought input from ex-
ternal sources including other anesthesiologists with expertise in
LAST, professional organizations representing physicians and
dentists who commonly use local anesthetics, and open forum

Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine (cid:129) Volume 43, Number 2, February 2018

discussion of our recommendations.1 Because the current practice
advisory represents an interim update and does not recommend
major changes to treatment, external input was solicited only at
open forum presentations coinciding with the ASRA 2015 and
2016 spring meetings.

Strength of Recommendations

As stated in our 2010 advisory: “There are no randomized
clinical trials (RCTs) evaluating serious human LAST; future RCTs
are unlikely because of the rarity of these complications and the
associated difficulty of obtaining informed consent for medical
interventions in critical illness. Common strength-of-evidence
schemas that are based on RCT-level evidence are therefore inap-
propriate for the topic of human LAST, but may be appropriate for
animal studies. Hence, the panel's recommendations are based on
a modified Classification of Recommendations and Levels of
Evidence schema that was developed by the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association14 (Table 1). The panel
wishes to emphasize that assigning a level of evidence B or C
should not be construed as implying that
the associated
recommendation is supported by conflicting data or is limited
by conflicting interpretations of the available data. Rather, such
recommendations reflect our recognition of the importance of
the particular question as it relates to LAST and to the reality
that the specific question is either yet to be addressed by an
RCT or does not lend itself to experimental inquiry in humans.”1

Limitations

As with previous ASRA advisories, “readers of this manu-
script are reminded that practice advisories are created when data
on a subject are limited or non-existent. Advisories rely on limited
clinical and animal data and, as such, the synthesis and interpreta-
tion of data by one group of experts may differ from conclusions by

TABLE 1. Classification of Recommendations and Levels of
Evidence

Classification of Recommendations

Class I

Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general
agreement that a given procedure or treatment is
useful and effective

Class II

Conditions for which there is conflicting evidence

and/or a divergence of opinion about the
usefulness/efficacy of a procedure or treatment
IIa. Weight of evidence/opinion is in favor of

usefulness/efficacy

IIb. Usefulness/efficacy is less well established by

evidence/opinion

Class III

Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general

agreement that the procedure/treatment is not
useful/effective, and in some cases may be harmful

Level of Evidence

Level A
Level B

Data derived from RCTs
Data derived from nonrandomized or laboratory, eg,
animal, studies; supported by multiple case reports
or case series

Level C

Consensus opinion of experts

Table 1 is presented unchanged from the Second ASRA Practice
Advisory on LAST1 and is modified from an American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association schema for developing and
grading guidelines.14

another set of equally qualified experts. Thus, practice advisories
represent a level of recommendation less than that offered by stan-
dards or clinical practice guidelines. The recommendations
contained herein do not define standard of care. They are not
intended to replace clinical judgment as applied to a specific pa-
tient scenario. These recommendations are intended to encourage
optimal patient care, but cannot ensure the avoidance of adverse out-
comes. As with any practice advisory recommendation, these are sub-
ject to revision as knowledge of specific complications advances.”15,16

DISCUSSION

Mechanisms Underlying Lipid Resuscitation

The most important recent advances in our knowledge of
LAST relate to the basic science of lipid emulsion resuscitation,
within both anesthesiology and other disciplines that involve
medical toxicology. New to this practice advisory, Fettiplace
and Weinberg10 provide an in depth discussion of the mechanisms
that underlie the therapeutic reversal of LAST by lipid emulsion.
Henceforth, we summarize the most salient points of this topic,
the complexity of which necessitates reading the accompany-
ing supporting article to move beyond basic understanding.

Lipid emulsion reversal of LAST is ultimately linked to
cellular mechanisms that are affected by local anesthetics. Under
normal circumstances, local anesthetics block nerve conduction
by inhibiting transduction of sodium, calcium, and potassium
through voltage-gated ionotropic channels located in the cell
membrane. Acute local anesthetic cardiotoxicity negatively im-
pacts myocardial contractility, cardiac conduction, and systemic
vascular resistance through a complex and widespread set of
events that involve channel blockade, metabolic signaling, and in-
tracellular energy production, that is, inhibition of oxidative phos-
phorylation. The clinical effects of these cellular events manifest
initially as hypertension and tachydysrhythmias that progress to
depressed cardiac conduction and performance (reduced cardiac
output), bradycardia, and hypotension. Similarly, local anesthetic
toxic effects on central nervous system (CNS) ionic channels
manifest initially as altered mental status and/or mild prodromal
symptoms such as paresthesias, tinnitus, and agitation and prog-
ress to seizure and possible coma.

Lipid emulsion resuscitation was first proposed as a treat-
ment for LAST in 1998 and translated into clinical practice 8 years
later.10 Over this timeframe, a number of potential mechanisms of
action were proposed, the most prominent of which involved the
hypothesis that lipid emulsion infusion effectively created an
intravascular lipophilic “sink” into which lipid soluble local an-
esthetics such as bupivacaine partitioned and were ultimately
removed from the body.17 Twenty years later, lipid emulsion
therapy is believed to involve multiple mechanisms that involve
active shuttling of local anesthetic away from the heart and brain,
cardiotonic effects that involve the heart and/or vasculature, and
postconditioning cardioprotective effects.10

Shuttling Effects

Rather than acting as a static lipid sink, current research sup-
ports the concept that lipid emulsion works as a dynamic carrier to
scavenge local anesthetic away from high blood flow organs that
are most sensitive to LAST (ie, the heart and brain) and redistrib-
ute it to organs that store and detoxify the drug (ie, muscle and
liver, respectively)18 (Fig. 1). The precise mechanisms of local
anesthetic binding to lipid droplets are not understood fully but
are believed to combine thermodynamic effects, for example,
electrostatic attraction and physicochemical characteristics such
as lipophilicity and acid-base ionization, as positively charged,

FIGURE 1. Schematic representation of mechanisms associated with lipid emulsion reversal of LAST, including shuttling of lipophilic local
anesthetic from the heart and brain to muscle and liver. Adapted from Fettiplace et al18 with permission.

fat-soluble local anesthetic molecules bind to negatively charged
lipid particles. These observations appear to support lipid emul-
sion having greater efficacy in shuttling the more lipophilic local
anesthetics such as bupivacaine. Nevertheless, even the less
lipophilic local anesthetics such as lidocaine or mepivacaine are
highly lipid soluble and carry a positive charge at physiologic
pH. Therefore, lipid emulsion should be effective at reversing
toxicity after overdose with lidocaine19 or mepivacaine. Further
evidence suggests that together these pharmacokinetic attributes
work to accelerate redistribution of local anesthetics by increasing
the α half-life in whole blood, while decreasing the concentra-
tion of local anesthetic in the nonlipid fraction. The net effect
shortens local anesthetic elimination half-life.20–22 Lipid emul-
sion also has nonscavenging effects that manifest as cardio-
tonic and postconditioning effects.

Cardiotonic Effects

Several lines of evidence support the concept that lipid in-
creases cardiac performance, which enhances the shuttling effect.
The direct cardiotonic effects of lipid emulsion increase cardiac
contractility, which increases cardiac output and blood flow through
affected organs. Volume loads associated with lipid resuscitation
improve cardiac function by a simple preload effect, although this
effect is significantly less than the positive inotropy seen in both
intact rat and isolated heart models during infusion of lipid. Lipid
infusion also increases blood pressure via poorly understood ef-
fects on the peripheral vasculature. Together, these mechanisms
serve to improve both cardiac output and blood pressure.23,24

Postconditioning Effects

Recent laboratory experiments support the concept that
adverse cellular effects of LAST overlap with mechanisms of
cardiac ischemia-reperfusion injury.25 Coupled with the observa-
tion that infused lipid emulsion activates cardioprotective path-
ways, this provides an additional mechanism of postconditioning

benefit to the local anesthetic-toxic heart.26,27 The explanations
behind these purported benefits are discussed in detail in the
supporting article.10

Incidence and Epidemiology

Since publication of our 2010 practice advisory, new evi-
dence has furthered our understanding of LAST epidemiology.
This information is derived from analysis of administrative data-
bases, registries, and case reports/case series. Of particular impor-
tance is publication of several studies that suggest the incidence of
LAST associated with epidural28 and peripheral nerve blocks
(PNBs) is decreasing,29 which has led some experts29,30 to debate
whether or not LAST remains a clinically relevant complication.

Administrative Databases

One avenue to assess the frequency of LAST in the general
community population is to query large administrative databases
such as the Premier Perspective Database (PPD).31 As part of
the current advisory series, Mörwald et al9 recently presented data
from over 400 hospitals on nearly 238,500 patients who received a
PNB for total joint arthroplasty between 2006 and 2014. This
methodology's weakness is that it lacks clinical details beyond
those revealed by diagnostic or billing codes, and because no
specific coding for LAST could be identified in the hospital
reports, the methodology relies on surrogate markers such
as seizure, cardiac arrest, or administration of lipid emulsion.
Although the occurrence of seizure or cardiac arrest may
overestimate the frequency of LAST, the increased use of
lipid emulsion on the day of surgery is likely specific to the
true diagnosis. In Mörwald et al's9 study, the cumulative rate
of LAST was 0.18%, that is, the rate of patients receiving a
PNB and experiencing at least one LAST-associated outcome
was 1.8/1000. During the 9-year study period, the overall adverse
outcome rate trended downward without the trend reaching
statistical significance, whereas the use of lipid emulsion increased

significantly. The investigators concluded that, although this
population-based frequency of LAST is low, it should be consid-
ered clinically meaningful.

The National Inpatient Sample (NIS) contains a diagnostic
code specific to LAST, although it remains uncertain how specific
the coding is for LAST events, because errors in coding can occur
as a result of physician documentation or data abstraction. In the
current practice advisory series, Rubin et al12 report an incidence
of LAST intermediate between that of the PPD and those of single
institutions and specialized registries. Their database query of over
710,000 PNBs placed for total joint arthroplasties revealed an
average adjusted incidence of 1.04 (confidence interval [CI],
0.49–1.80) LAST events per 1000 PNBs over the 15-year period
1998 to 2013. Of these events, 1 in 5 was considered major, that
is, involved a seizure (8.1%) or a major cardiac complication
(6.8%). Contrary to observations from case reports,4 there were
no deaths and multivariable analysis found no correlation between
LAST and age or comorbidity. Total shoulder arthroplasty was as-
sociated with LAST more often than knee or hip operations (odds
ratio [OR], 4.35; CI, 1.96–9.65), as was being cared for in a large
to medium-sized hospital. Over the 15-year study period, and
similar to Mörwald et al's9 findings, the odds of a LAST event
trended downward by 10% per year (OR, 0.90; CI, 0.84–0.96)
despite increased PNB use.

The PPD's 1.8/1000 cumulative rate and the NIS 1.04/1000
incidence, while similar, are considerably higher than the 0.04/
1000 to 0.8/1000 LAST incidences reported contemporaneously
from various registries,32 national surveys,33 and single institu-
tions.29,34 Variations in the incidence may reflect differing defi-
nitions of LAST. For example, studies that include generalized
CNS excitation35 or minor cardiac complications12 in addition
to seizure and cardiac arrest report a higher incidence of LAST
(0.87/1000 to 1.04/1000) than studies29 that only include seizure
or cardiac arrest (0.04/1000). With regard to expertise and case-
load, PPD data suggest that LAST events within the community,
where case volumes may be low and ultrasound use not universal,
may be more common than those reported from registry instru-
ments or single institutions that manifest expertise in regional an-
esthesia. Conversely, the NIS study found no difference between
teaching and nonteaching hospitals. In summary, although admin-
istrative databases have specific weaknesses related to the lack of
relevant clinical information on individual LAST events, they do
demonstrate that LAST remains a rare yet relevant issue in the
community at large.

Registries

A wealth of registry and observational study data have been
published since 2010. These works range from extensions of pre-
viously published quality assurance data sets,36,37 national data-
bases33,38 and international registries,35,39 to specific registries
that focus on pediatric practice,40–42 single-center data,29,32 and
data specific to interscalene brachial plexus block.34

The most important new finding from the Australian and
New Zealand Registry of Regional Anaesthesia (now the Interna-
tional Registry of Regional Anaesthesia) is that ultrasound guidance
reduces the risk of LAST throughout its continuum by 60% to 65%
(propensity analysis OR, 0.35–0.36) as compared with peripheral
nerve stimulation alone.35 This observation is supported by the
Dartmouth registry, which reported only 1 seizure in 12,668
ultrasound-guided blocks.32 The International Registry of Regional
Anaesthesia registry also reported a surprisingly higher risk of LAST
with lidocaine than with ropivacaine, which the authors speculated
may reflect a practitioner's false sense of security when using
relatively less toxic lidocaine.35

National survey data from Italy38 reveal an incidence of
LAST during PNB of 0.34/1000 blocks, and Finnish data33 docu-
ment a similar 0.37 per 1000 PNBs. Of note, the Finnish incidence
is lower if all LAST events (including epidural, but not spinal,
anesthetics) are included (0.07 per 1000). This observation is
consistent with previous knowledge that LAST is 4 to 5 times
more common with PNBs than with epidurals.1 If one were to
combine LAST events reported since 2010 from 11 registries
and observational studies, the population frequency is 0.27/1000
(95% CI, 0.21–0.35) (69 events per 251,325 PNBs).11

Data from observational studies offer some insights into
whether or not experience and expertise affect the rate of LAST.
The Finnish study33 noted a 3.3 relative risk of having a LAST
event in a nonuniversity hospital as compared with a university
hospital. Similarly, the Hospital for Special Surgery in New
York, which represents a specialized high-volume regional an-
esthesia practice, reported 0.04 seizures per 1000 blocks,
which is lower than other reports and may not apply to the com-
munity at large.29

Pediatric anesthetics captured in registries40,42 and single-
center41 observational studies confirm a very low overall rate of
LAST in children. Data from the 2012 Pediatric Regional Anes-
thesia Network documented no LAST episodes in 14,917 proce-
dures,42 although its most recent analysis of over 100,000 regional
anesthetics will report 7 severe LAST episodes (cardiac arrest or
seizure)—0.076/1000, 95% CI, 0.029 to 0.14/1000 (J.M. Neal,
MD, and D.M. Polaner, MD, personal written communication
September 19, 2017). The French-Language Society of Pediatric
Anaesthesiologists' registry40 reported rates of 0.16/1000 for
PNBs and 1.3/1000 neuraxial blocks (excluding spinal anesthe-
sia). The frequency of LAST associated with pediatric continuous
catheter techniques is higher, 1.53 per 1000.41 When compared
with the overall population frequency of 0.27/1000 (95% CI,
0.21–0.35),11 it can be argued that the rate of LAST in pediatric
populations is less than that in adults. This in part may be be-
cause most regional anesthesia in children is performed under
general anesthesia (which raises seizure threshold) using
smaller local anesthetic volumes, and children likely have a
lower comorbidity burden.

In summary, clinical registries have the capability of identify-
ing infrequent events that occur in large populations, but often at
the expense of detailed analysis. Of recent events that were reported
in sufficient detail, 72% were considered major: 42 seizures and
8 cardiovascular (CV) presentations.11 Expectedly, minor events
are less likely to be reported at all. These data support the asser-
tion that LAST, while rare, remains a serious complication of local
anesthetic use. Ultrasound guidance reduces the likelihood of any
LAST event, yet seizure and/or cardiac arrest still occur at an
estimated rate of 0.26/1000 ultrasound-guided blocks.43

Case Reports and Series

Voluminous case reports published over the past decade
emphasize the need to educate anesthesiologists and especially
nonanesthesiologists in the prevention, recognition, and treatment
of LAST. Case reports and case series allow in-depth analysis of
individual incidents of LAST, but without the ability to gain insight
into population-based frequency. The power of case report analysis
is the ability to discern patient comorbidities, technique details,
and treatment effectiveness, together with the ability to appreciate
evolving trends in LAST presentation. The latter is important in
assessing the impact of newer local anesthetic agents, nerve lo-
calization techniques (ultrasound guidance), and/or treatment
modalities such as lipid emulsion therapy. Insights from case re-
port analysis will be presented in Recognition section.

In summarizing knowledge related to the incidence or fre-
quency of LAST, we wish to emphasize that regardless of reporting
mechanism, administrative data, registries, or case reports, the true
frequency of LAST in the anesthesiology community is very
likely underreported. This stems from a number of factors in-
cluding misdiagnosis, publication bias, and individual practitioner
underreporting, especially because it relates to nonanesthesiologists.
The panel opines that, even if the rates of LAST are decreasing, the
complication should not be trivialized. When placed into the perspec-
tive of other rare anesthetic complications, serious LASToccurs more
frequently than epidural hematoma and at least as often as peripheral
nerve injury, and is unique to both in its potential for mortality.

Prevention

Prevention is the primary and preferred mechanism for re-
ducing the frequency and severity of LAST; meticulous attention
to detail is the most important aspect of prevention. Optimal pre-
vention is a multifactorial process, because no single intervention
eliminates risk. Prevention involves 3 facets: avoidance and/or
recognition of direct intravascular injection of local anesthetic,
mitigating systemic uptake of local anesthetic from soft tissues,
and awareness of patients at increased risk for LAST. The latter
topic will be discussed in Recognition section.

Limiting Local Anesthetic Uptake

Table 2 reviews key prevention strategies. Avoidance of in-
travascular injection is best accomplished by ultrasound guidance,
judicious use of an intravascular marker, and incremental injection
of local anesthetic through needles and catheters based on an ap-
propriate circulation time between injections (longer for lower

TABLE 2. Recommendations for Preventing LAST

extremity blocks and at-risk patients, such as those with slower
circulation). Systemic uptake of local anesthetic is best mitigated
by awareness of those regional techniques most associated with
delayed systemic uptake, by prolonging drug clearance through
the use of epinephrine,44 and by using the lowest effective local
anesthetic dose, which can be facilitated by low volume ultrasound-
guided techniques.43 The panel wishes to emphasize awareness
that local anesthetic toxicity is additive—whether by subsequent
redosing of the same or a different local anesthetic and whether
administration of the drug is by the same or a different member
of the perioperative team. The latter scenario may occur when
anesthesiologist and surgeon both administer local anesthetic
during the care of a patient.

LAST and the Newer Regional Anesthetic Techniques
New regional anesthetic techniques have expanded into anes-
thesiologists' practice. These include a variety of fascial plane-based
truncal blocks, local infiltration anesthesia (LIA), and extended
release liposomal bupivacaine (LB). Published information on
these topics is limited, which impacts the panel's ability to offer
definitive recommendations.

Within the anesthesiology community, the largest growth in
new techniques involves truncal blocks that target fascial planes
(eg, transversus abdominis plane, rectus sheath, quadratus lumborum,
pectoral blocks).45 Within the surgical community, LIA has ex-
panded, particularly in total joint arthroplasty practice. Case re-
ports document LAST occurrences in both truncal block46 and
LIA47 patients. The former may be at particularly high risk for
LAST because targeted tissue planes are very vascular, local anes-
thetic volumes are high, and the blocks are often used in at-risk

• There is no single measure that can prevent LAST in clinical practice.
• Ultrasound guidance significantly reduces the risk of LAST in humans undergoing peripheral nerve block. Nevertheless, individual reports
describe LAST despite the use of ultrasound. (I, B)
• Use the lowest effective dose of local anesthetic (dose = product of volume × concentration). (I, C)
• Use incremental injection of local anesthetics—administer 3 to 5 mL aliquots, pausing 15–30 seconds between each injection. When using a
fixed needle approach, eg, landmark, paresthesia-seeking, or electrical stimulation, time between injections should encompass 1 circulation time
(~30–45 s); however, this ideal may be balanced against the risk of needle movement between injections. Circulation time may be increased with
lower extremity blocks or in those patients with diminished cardiac output. Use of larger dosing increments suggests the need for longer
intervals to reduce the cumulative dose from stacked injections. (I, C)
• Aspirate the needle or catheter before each injection, recognizing that there is an ~2% false negative rate for this diagnostic intervention. (I, B)
• When injecting potentially toxic doses of local anesthetic, use of an intravascular marker is recommended. Although epinephrine is an imperfect
maker and its use is open to physician judgment, its benefits likely outweigh its risks in most patients (IIa, B):
○ Intravascular injection of epinephrine 10–15 μg/mL in adults produces a ≥10 beat heart rate increase or a ≥15 mm Hg systolic blood pressure

increase in the absence of β-blockade, active labor, advanced age, or general/neuraxial anesthesia.

○ Intravascular injection of epinephrine 0.5 μg/kg in children produces a ≥15 mm Hg increase in systolic blood pressure.
○ Appropriate subtoxic doses of local anesthetic can produce subjective symptoms of mild systemic toxicity (auditory changes, excitation,

metallic taste, etc) in unpremedicated patients.

○ Fentanyl 100 μg produces sedation if injected intravascularly in laboring patients.
• Caregivers should be aware of the additive nature of local anesthetic toxicity and adjust accordingly local anesthetic redosing and/or
administration by different perioperative providers. (II, B)
• The risk of LAST associated with truncal blocks may be reduced by using lower concentrations of local anesthetics, dosing on lean body weight,
adjunctive epinephrine, and observation for at least 30 to 45 minutes after the block. (I, C)
• Patients receiving LB should receive the same level of vigilance afforded to any patient receiving a local anesthetic. (I, C)
• Include local anesthetic dosing parameters and at-risk patient concerns as part of the preincisional surgical pause. (I, C)

patient populations, that is, children and parturients. The advisory
panel agrees with the recommendations put forth by Chin et al48
in their recent review of abdominal wall blocks. Their recom-
mended strategies to reduce the likelihood of LAST include using
epinephrine to reduce local anesthetic bioavailability,49 using di-
lute concentrations of less cardiotoxic local anesthetics, basing
dose calculations on lean body weight, and 30- to 45-minute
monitoring periods to account for the prolonged time to local
anesthetic peak plasma concentration that is inherent to truncal
blocks.48 (IIa; B)

Data pertinent to LB and LAST are limited, which is both
reassuring and worthy of conservative interpretation. Ilfeld et al's50
retrospective review of 6 published RCTs of LB use for 335 PNBs
reported no incident of identifiable LAST. Incidents of dose-related
bradycardia (2%–14%) were conceivably consistent with limited
LAST, but by no means diagnostic. To our knowledge, there are
no published case reports of LAST associated with LB (possibly
indicating negative reporting bias for adverse events); however,
130 cases (January 2012 to June 2016) are present in the US Food
and Drug Administration's (FDA's) Adverse Event Reporting Sys-
tem. This voluntary self-reporting system, which does not have a
code specific to LAST, is non–peer reviewed and is open to reports
from medical professionals, industry, and private individuals. Using
the statistical technique of disproportionality analysis, Aggarwal51
reports an association between LB and LAST based on the FDA's
Adverse Event Reporting System data.

The corpus of published human studies on LB totals only a
few thousand patients, the drug has been clinically available
in the United States for only 5 years, and the pharmacologic and
chemical dynamics of liposomal formulations are dramatically
different from standard local anesthetics. Based on such limited
information, our recommendation is that patients receiving LB
be afforded the same level of vigilance as would be given to any
patient receiving a local anesthetic (IIb; C).

Prevention Strategies

In the interval since our second practice advisory, 2 new find-
ings related to prevention deserve emphasis. First is the evolving
role of ultrasound guidance. Meta-analysis had shown that ultra-
sound reduced the incidence of vascular puncture associated with
PNB compared with peripheral nerve stimulation,52 yet previous
institutional32,36 and registry39 data did not link this surrogate
outcome to a definitive reduction in seizure or cardiac arrest.
In the intervening years, Barrington and Kluger35 have confirmed
that ultrasound guidance reduces the incidence of LAST episodes
spanning the continuum from mild subjective symptoms of tox-
icity to seizure and cardiac arrest. As compared with landmark
techniques, ultrasound reduced the risk of LAST by 65% in their
study of over 25,000 PNBs. These findings are consistent with
those reported by Orebaugh et al.37 The second new finding
related to prevention involves the changing patterns of LAST
presentation, as discussed below.

Recognition: The Changing Patterns of
LAST Presentation

Our 2010 advisory was accompanied by DiGregorio et al's4
analysis of 93 LAST cases reported over the 30-year period,
1979 to 2009.4 In the interim, Vasques et al53 presented 67 addi-
tional cases from 2010 to March 2014. Accompanying the current
advisory, Gitman and Barrington11 present 47 more cases reported
between April 2014 and November 2016. These case series span
nearly 4 decades and serve to confirm some expected patterns of
LAST clinical presentation while revealing changing patterns in
others. First, all 3 case series reinforce the concept that LAST

events are skewed toward the extremes of age. The recent finding
that large amounts of absorbed local anesthetic are stored in skel-
etal muscle suggests that patients with low muscle mass are at
higher risk for LAST. The most recent Pediatric Regional Anes-
thesia Network data confirm similar observations in infants under
6 months old, whose rate of serious LAST is 6-fold higher than
that for other children (J.M. Neal, MD, and D.M. Polaner, MD,
personal written communication on September 19, 2017). In addi-
tion to lower muscle mass, infants and neonates manifest a higher
unbound fraction of local anesthetic. Second, although bupivacaine
is the most toxic local anesthetic and the most difficult overdose to
resuscitate when LAST occurs, all local anesthetics are capable of
causing toxicity, including “safer” agents such as lidocaine and
ropivacaine (26% and 21%, respectively, of total events in the latest
case series).11 The advisory panel and others35,54 speculate that
practitioners may be less vigilant with regard to dosing and safety
steps when administering these purportedly less toxic local anes-
thetics. Furthermore, the panel opines that, when viewed on an
equipotent basis, ropivacaine as administered in most clinical set-
tings is likely similar in toxicity to bupivacaine. Third, about 15%
of LAST events involve continuous local anesthetic infusions
and most episodes present 1 to 4 days after initiation of the in-
fusion, often with subtle prodromes or hemodynamic changes.
The combined case series4,11,53 also reveal shifting patterns
in LAST's clinical presentation. First, an increasing number of
events (about 20%) occur outside of the traditional hospital envi-
ronment and half involve a nonanesthesiologist. The occurrence
of LAST after simple tissue infiltration of local anesthetic in 20%
of events is consistent with nonanesthesia-trained practitioners ad-
ministering the drug and/or an increase in LIA techniques. Similar
events involve topical anesthesia of the airway or transcutaneous
absorption of local anesthetics. Second, a new signal from the
current case series11 involves a preponderance of pediatric LAST
events associated with penile block, which accounted for a quarter
of case reports during that series' 2.5-year period. Some of these
cases required chest compression.55 Encouragingly, after imple-
menting policy, dosing, and technique changes, the involved insti-
tution reports no further LASTevents associated with penile block
(G. Weinberg, MD and R. Yu, MD, personal verbal communica-
tion May 2017).

The 2010 practice advisory noted that 40% of reported cases
did not present in a manner consistent with the classic textbook
description of LAST. Rather than an initial complex of CNS
excitement, for example, metallic taste or auditory changes,
followed by seizure and then CV collapse, nearly half of the
presentations were considered “atypical,” presenting with CV
signs alone (no evidence of CNS toxicity) and/or having a delayed
presentation (more than 5 minutes after injection of local anes-
thetic). Although the occurrence rates vary slightly, the interim
analyses from 2010 to 201611,53 conform to previous observations
that about one third of patients present with combined CNS/CV
signs and symptoms (mostly seizures, hypertension or hypoten-
sion, and electrocardiographic changes). Fewer patients exhibit
isolated CV symptoms as compared with isolated CNS symptoms
(Figs. 2, 3). Another change to clinical presentation is a shift in
timing from signs and symptoms appearing coincident with or
within a minute of local anesthetic administration (intravascular
injection) to presentations that are delayed from several minutes
to 30 or even 60 minutes after injection11,53 (Fig. 4). We speculate
that this shift toward delayed presentation involves fewer intra-
vascular injections as a consequence of ultrasound guidance,
the increasing use of local tissue infiltration techniques, and/or
increasing use of continuous local anesthetic infusion. This shift
strengthens our previous advice to observe patients for at least
30 minutes after injecting potentially toxic doses of local anesthetic.

P
r
o
t
e
c
t
e
d
b
y

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h
t
,

FIGURE 2. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity presentation by
organ system, as described in case reports from 2014 to 2016.11

Despite changing patterns in LAST presentation, our recom-
mendations remain consistent. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity
is a masquerader, and its detection requires persistent open-minded
vigilance. To emphasize reasonable local anesthetic dosing and to
highlight those patients most at risk for LAST, we recommend in-
cluding a discussion of local anesthetic use during the preincisional
surgical pause. Doing so facilitates awareness among all perioperative

FIGURE 3. Spectrum of LAST clinical presentations, as described
in case reports from 2014 to 2016.11

FIGURE 4. The changing time intervals between injection of local
anesthetic and initial presentation of LAST over 3 time periods:
1979 to 2009,4 2010 to 2014,53 and 2014 to 2016.11 The
changing slopes of trend lines suggest that contemporary LAST
presentations are becoming more delayed as compared with
previous years.

team members,

team members of maximal local anesthetic dosing and the issue
of additive toxicity, particularly because it pertains to local an-
esthetic administration by different
including
nonanesthesiologists. The surgical pause is also an opportunity to
highlight at-risk patients and how they might present with LAST.
Classic presentation patterns that involve subjective signs, seizure,
or cardiac arrest in close proximity to local anesthetic dosing do
not always occur. When patients receive a local anesthetic and
manifest a delayed presentation of agitation or CNS depres-
sion, or unexplained signs of cardiac compromise such as
progressive hypotension or bradycardia, LAST should be
considered in the differential diagnosis. Table 3 outlines factors be-
lieved to heighten the risk of LAST. Table 4 reviews recommenda-
tions for diagnosing LAST.

Treatment: Evolving Paradigms

The treatment of severe LAST is fundamentally different
from conventional cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) insofar
as toxic cardiomyopathy differs pathophysiologically from other
causes of CV collapse. First, unlike contemporary CPR paradigms
that eschew early respiratory interventions in favor of cardiac
support, successful treatment of LAST hinges on the primacy
of airway management to prevent the hypoxia, hypercapnia,
and acidosis that potentiate LAST and negatively impact resusci-
tative efforts. The mechanism of potentiation may be related to
increased free fraction of local anesthetic and/or worsening of
cardiac function. Second, while CPR and Advanced Cardiac Life
Support (ACLS) symptomatically treat hemodynamic perturba-
tions consequent to ischemic cardiac injury, usually with the goal
of improving coronary perfusion, successful treatment of LAST
seeks to effectively moderate or reverse the mechanisms underly-
ing the local anesthetic toxicity. Recent evidence indicates that the
inotropic benefit of lipid only occurs when myocardial local anes-
thetic content is reduced below a threshold that corresponds to ion
channel blocking concentrations. This underlines the importance
of effective CPR to ensure that coronary perfusion is sufficient
to reduce local anesthetic tissue levels to attain the maximum ben-
efit of lipid infusion. Third, recent data from rat models reinforce
the admonition that epinephrine, when necessary, be administered
initially in small doses (1 μg/kg or less) to avoid impaired

A
n
e
s
t
h
e
s
a
&
P
a
n
M
e
d
c
n
e
:

TABLE 3. Risk Factors for LAST

• Patient characteristics
○ Extremes of age—less than 16 or more than 60 years
○ Low muscle mass—particularly with neonates, infants, and the debilitated elderly
○ Female > male
○ Comorbidities

▪ Cardiac disease, especially arrhythmias, conduction abnormalities, ischemia, and congestive heart failure
▪ Liver disease
▪ Metabolic disease, especially diabetes mellitus, isovaleric acidemia, mitochondrial disease, and carnitine deficiency
▪ CNS diseases
▪ Low plasma protein binding—liver disease, malnourishment, infants, pregnancy

• Local anesthetic characteristics
○ Bupivacaine has a lower safety margin and resuscitation is more difficult in the event of LAST, but local anesthetics such as ropivacaine and

lidocaine still account for a significant proportion of LAST events.

○ Block site, total local anesthetic dose, test dosing, and patient comorbidities are more predictive of high plasma levels of local anesthetic than

are body weight or body mass index.

○ Local anesthetic infusions are particularly problematic after 1 to 4 days and in patients of small body mass.
○ Seizure is up to 5 times more likely after PNB than epidural block.
• Practice setting
○ Up to 20% of LAST cases occur outside of the hospital setting.
○ Nonanesthesiologists are involved in up to 50% of LAST cases.

Risk factors are extrapolated primarily from case reports and series. This table is derived from mostly IIa; B evidence.

pulmonary gas exchange56 and increased afterload. Fourth, simu-
lated LAST scenarios have demonstrated the usefulness of the ASRA
Checklist57 as a cognitive aid during LAST treatment58 and the value
of a reader to prompt adherence to recommendations.59 An updated
version of the ASRA Checklist is part of this practice advisory
series.13 The ASRA LAST smart phone app (iOS and Android)
has been updated coincident with this practice advisory.

Insights Regarding Contemporary LAST Treatment

The case report analysis presented with this practice advi-
sory11 allows insights into the contemporary treatment of LAST.

Treatment protocols developed by national organizations such as
ASRA57 and the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain
and Ireland60 are followed inconsistently. Less than half (47%)
of patients with LASTwere treated with lipid emulsion, and nearly
40% of those patients received the antidote 10 minutes or longer
after symptom onset, occasionally at an incorrect dose. Neverthe-
less, and within the limits of case series comparison, the overall
use of lipid emulsion has apparently increased from 34% to
47% as compared with our 2010 report.4 An ACLS was necessary
in 21% of patients; duration ranged from 2 to 60 minutes. Two of
the reported 47 patients died; one from a combination of delayed
diagnosis and treatment, and the other self-administered over 4 g

TABLE 4. Recommendations for Diagnosing LAST

• Classic descriptions of LAST depict a progression of subjective symptoms of CNS excitement (agitation, auditory changes, metallic taste or
abrupt onset of psychiatric symptoms), followed by seizures then CNS depression (drowsiness, coma, or respiratory arrest). Near the end of this
continuum, initial signs of cardiac toxicity (hypertension, tachycardia, or ventricular arrhythmias) are supplanted by cardiac depression
(bradycardia, conduction block, asystole, decreased contractility, and hypotension). However, there is substantial variation in this classic
description, including:
○ Simultaneous presentation of CNS and cardiac toxicity
○ Cardiac toxicity without prodromal signs and symptoms of CNS toxicity
○ Thus, the practitioner must be vigilant for atypical or unexpected presentation of LAST. (I; B)
• The timing of LAST presentation is variable. Immediate (<60 s) presentation suggests intravascular injection of local anesthetic with direct access
to the brain, whereas presentation that is delayed 1 to 5 min suggests intermittent intravascular injection, lower extremity injection, or delayed
tissue absorption. Recent case reports suggest a shift toward delayed presentations of LAST. Because LAST can present more than 15 min and
occasionally over an hour after injection, patients who receive potentially toxic doses of local anesthetic should be closely monitored for at least
30 min after injection. (I; B)
• The overall variability of LAST signs and symptoms, timing of onset, and association with various disease states suggests that practitioners
should maintain a low threshold for considering the diagnosis of LAST in patients with atypical or unexpected presentation of CNS or cardiac
signs and symptoms after receiving more than a minimal dose of local anesthetic. (IIa; B)

of topical lidocaine at home. As expected, all 11 unpublished cases
submitted to lipidrescue.org from April 2014 to November 2016 re-
ceived lipid emulsion immediately or within 5 minutes of symptom
onset. Three of these patients required ACLS, but none died.

been increased to ~12 mL/kg based on FDA recommendations.61
Nevertheless, total lipid doses used in resuscitation of LAST are
usually much less (typically about half) of this limit. Thus, it is impor-
tant to avoid delivering an excessive dose of lipid since dangerous fat
overload can occur.62 Table 5 outlines treatment recommendations.

New Treatment Recommendations

The use of lipid emulsion as an antidote for LAST is “off
label,” as defined by the FDA. Our 2010 advisory suggested
using lipid emulsion therapy at the first sign of arrhythmia, pro-
longed seizures, or rapid clinical deterioration of the patient.
Based on evidence that lipid shuttling is most effective early in
the toxic event10 when local anesthetic plasma concentrations
are at their peak, we now unequivocally recommend lipid emul-
sion therapy soon after airway management in any LAST event
that is judged to be potentially serious. Furthermore, because ad-
verse effects from lipid administration specifically as an antidote
for LAST appear to be minor and limited, we recommend erring
on the early side of administration. The maximum lipid dose has

Future Directions

If the previous decade is any indication, we expect continued
progress in our understanding of LAST—its incidence, cellular
mechanisms, prevention, and treatment. Much work remains with
regard to understanding the cellular and systemic mechanisms in-
herent to local anesthetic poisoning. Advancement of this knowl-
edge holds promise for improved resuscitation. Whether or not the
overall incidence of LAST is truly diminishing remains open to
debate, particularly because it pertains to the healthcare community
at large, in nonhospital settings, and among nonanesthesiologist
practitioners. Hopefully the future will see further development of
local anesthetic alternatives such as neosaxitoxin, which blocks

TABLE 5. Recommendations for Treatment of LAST

• If signs and symptoms of LAST occur, prompt and effective airway management is crucial to preventing hypoxia, hypercapnia, and acidosis,
which are known to potentiate LAST. (I; B)
• Lipid emulsion therapy (I; B):
○ Administer at the first signs of LAST, after airway management
○ Timeliness of lipid emulsion is more important than the order of administration modality (bolus vs infusion)

▪ 20% lipid emulsion BOLUS

• 100 mL over 2–3 min if patient is over 70 kg
• 1.5 mL/kg over 2–3 min if patient is less than 70 kg

▪ 20% lipid emulsion INFUSION

• 200–250 mL over 15–20 min if patient is over 70 kg
• 0.25 mL/kg/min if patient is less than 70 kg (ideal body weight)
• If circulatory stability is not attained, consider rebolus or increasing infusion to 0.5 mL/kg/min

▪ Continue infusion for at least 10 min after circulatory stability is attained.
▪ Approximately 12 mL/kg lipid emulsion is recommended as the upper limit for initial dosing. (IIb; B)
▪ Propofol is not a substitute for lipid emulsion. (III; B)

• Seizure control:
○ If seizures occur, they should be rapidly halted with benzodiazepines. If benzodiazepines are not readily available, lipid emulsion or small

doses of propofol are acceptable. (I; B)
▪ Although propofol can stop seizures, large doses further depress cardiac function; propofol should be avoided when there are signs of
cardiovascular compromise. (III; B)
○ If seizures persist despite benzodiazepines, small doses of succinylcholine or similar neuromuscular blocker should be considered to minimize

acidosis and hypoxemia. (I; C)

• If cardiac arrest occurs:
○ If epinephrine is used, small initial doses (≤1 μg/kg) are preferred. (IIa; B)
○ Vasopressin is not recommended. (III; B)
○ Avoid calcium channel blockers and β-adrenergic receptor blockers. (III; C)
○ If ventricular arrhythmias develop, amiodarone is preferred (IIa; B); treatment with local anesthetics (lidocaine or procainamide) is not

recommended. (III; B)

• Failure to respond to lipid emulsion and vasopressor therapy should prompt institution of CPB (I; B). Because there can be considerable lag in
beginning CPB, it is reasonable to notify the closest facility capable of providing it when cardiovascular compromise is first identified during an
episode of LAST.
• Patients with a significant CV event should be monitored for at least 4–6 h. If the event is limited to CNS symptoms that resolve quickly, they
should be monitored for at least 2 h. (IIa; B)
• Use written or electronic checklists as cognitive aids during the management of LAST. A dedicated reader improves adherence to the checklist. (I; A)

These recommendations are intended to encourage optimal patient care but cannot ensure the avoidance of adverse outcomes. As with any practice ad-

visory recommendation, these are subject to revision as knowledge advances regarding specific complications.

The class of recommendation and level of evidence for each intervention are given in parenthesis (see Table 1).
Changes from the 2010 LAST practice advisory1 are italicized.
CPB indicates cardiopulmonary bypass.

sensory conduction by binding to the external pores of noncardiac
sodium channels and does not cross the blood-brain barrier.63
Neosaxitoxin thus prolongs anesthesia without the risk of local
anesthetic-induced cardio- and CNS toxicity. Until such time as
alternative drugs come into use, the burden is on anesthesiologists
and LAST researchers to improve our knowledge of basic mech-
anisms, enhance early recognition, improve awareness, and build
effective systems for prevention and treatment.

To reiterate our concluding comments from the 2010 practice
advisory, “LAST remains a significant clinical problem. Consid-
ering 1) the extensive use of local anesthetics, 2) the frequent
use of doses sufficient to cause significant morbidity or mortality,
and 3) the imperfect nature of our ability to predict, prevent, de-
tect, and treat these complications, it remains the responsibility
of all clinicians using local anesthetics to understand their poten-
tial for causing severe systemic toxicity and to be prepared to re-
spond immediately when these events occur.”1 Moreover, subtle
or undetected patient comorbidities can significantly increase sus-
ceptibility to LAST. Practice patterns and system improvements
may well reduce the likelihood of LASTand optimize patient safety.
Nevertheless, although we contend that the frequency of LAST can
be reduced, it is unlikely to be eliminated altogether—there will
always be system errors, unrecognized patient comorbidities, and
stochastic events that invariably arise in large populations. Although
LAST is indeed a rare event, it still occurs despite proper tech-
nique used by competent professionals. When LAST happens,
recognition and preparedness make it a treatable complication of
regional anesthesia.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank the following colleagues who made sub-
stantial contributions to this project through authorship of the in-
dividual background articles from which this executive summary
was drawn: Hospital for Special Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY: Crispiana Cozowicz, MD; Mt. Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, NY: Nicole Zubizarreta, MPH and Jashvant
Poeran, MD, PhD; University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chi-
cago, IL: Steven Roth, MD; Pritzker School of Medicine, University
of Chicago, Chicago, IL: Monica Matsumoto, BA; Stanford University,
Palo Alto, CA: T. Kyle Harrison, MD; and Virginia Mason Medical
Center, Seattle, WA: Crystal M. Woodward, MD.

REFERENCES

1. Neal JM, Bernards CM, Butterworth JF, et al. ASRA practice

advisory on local anesthetic systemic toxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;
35:152–161.

2. Corcoran W, Butterworth J, Weller RS, et al. Local anesthetic-induced
cardiac toxicity: a survey of contemporary practice strategies among
academic anesthesiology departments. Anesth Analg. 2006;103:
1322–1326.

toxicity: a review. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35:167–176.

4. Di Gregorio G, Neal JM, Rosenquist RW, Weinberg GL. Clinical

presentation of local anesthetic systemic toxicity: a review of published
cases, 1979 to 2009. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35:181–187.

5. Drasner K. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity: a historical perspective.

Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35:160–164.

6. Mulroy MF, Hejtmanek MR. Prevention of local anesthetic systemic

toxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35:177–180.

7. Weinberg GL. Treatment of local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST).

Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35:188–193.

8. Kahn R, Gale EA. Gridlocked guidelines for diabetes. Lancet. 2010;375:

2203–2204.

9. Mörwald EE, Zubizarreta N, Cozowicz C, Poeran J, Memtsoudis SG.
Incidence of local anesthetic systemic toxicity in orthopedic patients
receiving peripheral nerve blocks. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2017;42:
442–445.

10. Fettiplace MR, Weinberg G. The mechanisms underlying lipid resuscitation

therapy. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2018;43:138–149.

11. Gitman M, Barrington MJ. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity: a review
of recent case reports and registries. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2018;43:
124–130.

12. Rubin DS, Motsumoto M, Weinberg G, Roth S. Local anesthetic

systemic toxicity in total joint arthroplasty: incidence and risk factors in
the United States from the National Inpatient Sample 1998–2013.
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2018;43:131–137.

13. Neal JM, Woodward CM, Harrison TK. The American Society of Regional
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine checklist for managing local anesthetic
systemic toxicity: 2017 version. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2018;43:150–153.

14. Eagle KA, Berger PB, Calkins H, et al. ACC/AHA guideline update for
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation for noncardiac surgery: executive
summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Update the
1996 Guidelines on Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation for
Noncardiac Surgery). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39:542–553.

15. ASA Standards, Guidelines, Statements and Practice Parameters.
Available at: http://www.asahq.org/resources/clinical-information.
Accessed January 21, 2015.

16. Neal JM, Kopp SL, Lanier WL, Pasternak JJ, Rathmell JP. Anatomy

and pathophysiology of spinal cord injury associated with regional
anesthesia and pain medicine: 2015 update. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2015;
40:506–525.

17. Weinberg GL, VadeBoncouer TR, Ramaraju GA, Garcia-Amaro MF, Cwik

MJ. Pretreatment or resuscitation with a lipid emulsion shifts the
dose-response to bupivacaine-induced asystole in rats. Anesthesiology.
1998;88:1071–1075.

18. Fettiplace MR, Lis K, Ripper R, et al. Multi-modal contributions to

detoxification of acute pharmacotoxicity by a triglyceride micro-emulsion.
J Control Release. 2015;198:62–70.

19. Dix SK, Rosner GF, Nayar M, et al. Intractable cardiac arrest due to

lidocaine toxicity successfully resuscitated with lipid emulsion. Crit Care
Med. 2011;39:872–871.

20. Dureau P, Charbit B, Nicolas N, Benhamou D, Mazoit JX. Effect of

Intralipid® on the dose of ropivacaine or levobupivacaine tolerated by
volunteers. Anesthesiology. 2016;125:474–483.

21. Shi K, Xia Y, Wang Q, et al. The effect of lipid emulsion on

pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of bupivacaine in rats. Anesth
Analg. 2013;116:804–809.

22. Heinonen JA, Litonius E, Salmi T, et al. Intravenous lipid emulsion

given to volunteers does not affect symptoms of lidocaine brain toxicity.
Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2015;116:378–383.

23. Fettiplace MR, Ripper R, Lis K, et al. Rapid cardiotonic effects of lipid

emulsion infusion. Crit Care Med. 2013;41:e156–e162.

24. Stehr SN, Ziegeler JC, Pexa A, et al. The effects of lipid infusion on
myocardial function and bioenergetics in l-bupivacaine toxicity in the
isolated rat heart. Anesth Analg. 2007;104:186–192.

25. Fettiplace MR, Kowal K, Ripper R, et al. Insulin signaling in

bupivacaine-induced cardiac toxicity: sensitization during recovery
and potentiation by lipid emulsion. Anesthesiology. 2016;124:
428–442.

26. Lou P-H, Lucchinett E, Zhang L, et al. The mechanism of Intralipid®-

mediated cardioprotection complex IV inhibition by the active
metabolite, palmitoylcarnitine, generates reactive oxygen species
and activates reperfusion injury salvage kinases. PLoS One. 2014;
9:e87205.

27. Rahman S, Li J, Bopassa JCJ, et al. Phosphorylation of GSK-3b mediates
intralipid-induced cardioprotection against Ischemia/reperfusion injury.
Anesthesiology. 2011;115:242–253.

46. Weiss E, Jolly C, Dumoulin JL, et al. Convulsions in 2 patients after
bilateral ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane blocks for
Cesarean analgesia. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2014;39:248–251.

28. Mulroy MF. Systemic toxicity and cardiotoxicity from local anesthetics:
Incidence and preventive measures. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2002;27:
556–561.

29. Liu SS, Ortolan S, Sandoval MV, et al. Cardiac arrest and seizures

caused by local anesthetic systemic toxicity after peripheral nerve blocks:
Should we still fear the reaper? Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2016;41:5–21.

30. Weinberg G, Barron G. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST): Not
gone, hopefully not forgotten. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2016;41:1–2.

31. Premier Perspective Database. Available at: https://www.premierinc.com/
transforming-healthcare/healthcare-performanceimprovement/premier-
research-services/. Accessed June 13, 2016.

32. Sites BD, Taenzer AH, Herrick MD, et al. Incidence of local anesthetic

systemic toxicity and postoperative neurologic symptoms associated with
12,668 ultrasound-guided nerve blocks. An analysis from a prospective
clinical registry. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2012;37:478–482.

33. Heinonen J, Litonius E, Pitkanen M, Rosenberg P. Incidence of severe local
anaesthetic toxicity and adoption of lipid rescue in Finnish anaesthesia
departments in 2011–2013. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2015;59:1032–1037.

34. Rohrbaugh M, Kentor ML, Orebaugh SL, Williams B. Outcomes of

shoulder surgery in the sitting position with interscalene nerve block: a
single-center series. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2013;38:28–33.

35. Barrington MJ, Kluger R. Ultrasound guidance reduces the risk of local
anesthetic systemic toxicity following peripheral nerve blockade.
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2013;38:289–299.

36. Orebaugh SL, Williams BA, Vallejo M, Kentor ML. Adverse outcomes
associated with stimulator-based peripheral nerve blocks with versus
without ultrasound visualization. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2009;34:251–255.

37. Orebaugh SL, Kentor ML, Williams BA. Adverse outcomes associated
with nerve stimulator-guided and ultrasound-guided peripheral nerve
blocks by supervised trainees: update of a single-site database. Reg Anesth
Pain Med. 2012;37:577–582.

38. Allegri M, Bugada D, Grossi P, et al. Italian registry of complications

associated with regional anesthesia (RICALOR). An incidence analysis
from a prospective clinical survey. Minerva Anestesiol. 2016;82:392–402.

39. Barrington MJ, Watts SA, Gledhill SR, et al. Preliminary results of the
Australasian Regional Anaesthesia Collaboration: a prospective audit of
more than 7000 peripheral nerve and plexus blocks for neurologic and other
complications. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2009;34:534–541.

40. Ecoffey C, Lacroix F, Giaufré E, Orliaguet G, Courrèges P. Epidemiology
and morbidity of regional anesthesia in children: a follow-up one-year
prospective survey of the French-Language Society of Paediatric
Anaesthesiologists (ADARPEF). Paediatr Anaesth. 2010;20:1061–1069.

41. Gurnaney H, Kraemer FW, Maxwell L, Muhly WT, Schleelein L, Ganesh

A. Ambulatory continuous peripheral nerve blocks in children and
adolescents: a longitudinal 8-year single center study. Anesth Analg. 2014;
118:621–627.

Network (PRAN): a multi-institutional study of the use and incidence of
complications of pediatric regional anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 2012;115:
1353–1364.

43. Neal JM. Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia and patient safety: update
of an evidence-based analysis. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2016;41:195–204.

44. Bernards CM, Kopacz DJ. Effect of epinephrine on lidocaine clearance in
vivo: a microdialysis study in humans. Anesthesiology. 1999;91:962–968.

47. Fenten MG, Rohrbach A, Wymenga AB, Stienstra R. Systemic local

anesthetic toxicity after local infiltration analgesia following a polyethylene
tibial insert exchange: a case report. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2014;39:
264–265.

48. Chin KJ, McDonnell JG, Carvalho B, Sharkey A, Pawa A, Gadsden J.

Essentials of our current understanding: abdominal wall blocks. Reg Anesth
Pain Med. 2017;42:133–183.

49. Miranda P, Corvetto MA, Altermatt FR, Araneda A, Echevarria GC,
Cortinez LI. Levobupivacaine absorption pharmacokinetics with and
without epinephrine during TAP block: analysis of doses based on the
associated risk of local anaesthetic toxicity. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2016;
72:1221–1227.

50. Ilfeld BM, Viscusi ER, Hadzic A, et al. Safety and side effect profile of
liposome bupivacaine (Exparel) in peripheral nerve blocks. Reg Anesth
Pain Med. 2015;40:572–582.

51. Aggarwal N. Local anesthetics systemic toxicity association with Exparel
(bupivacaine liposome)—a pharmacovigilance evaluation. Expert Opin
Drug Saf. 2017;5:1–7.

52. Abrahams MS, Aziz MF, Fu RF, Horn JL. Ultrasound guidance compared
with electrical neurostimulation for peripheral nerve block: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Br J Anaesth.
2009;102:408–417.

53. Vasques F, Behr AU, Weinberg G, Ori C, Di Gregorio G. A review of local
anesthetic systemic toxicity cases since publication of the American
Society of Regional Anesthesia recommendations. To whom it may
concern. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2015;40:698–705.

54. Neal JM. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity. Improving patient safety one

step at a time. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2013;38:259–261.

55. Yu RN, Houck CS, Casta A, Blum RH. Institutional policy changes to
prevent cardiac toxicity associated with bupivacaine penile blockade in
infants. A A Case Rep. 2016;7:71–75.

56. Wang Q-G, Wu C, Xia Y, et al. Epinephrine deteriorates pulmonary gas

exchange in a rat model of bupivacaine-induced cardiotoxicity: a threshold
dose of epinephrine. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2017;42:432–350.

57. Neal JM, Mulroy MF, Weinberg GL. American Society of Regional

Anesthesia and Pain Medicine checklist for managing local anesthetic
systemic toxicity: 2012 version. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2012;37:16–18.

58. Neal JM, Hsiung RL, Mulroy MF, Halpern BB, Dragnich AD, Slee AE.

ASRA checklist improves trainee performance during a simulated episode
of local anesthetic systemic toxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2012;37:8–15.

59. McEvoy MD, Hand WR, Stoll WD, Furse CM, Nietert PJ. Adherence to
guidelines for the management of local anesthetic systemic toxicity is
improved by an electronic decision support tool and designated “reader”.
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2014;39:299–305.

60. AAGBI Safety Guideline: Management of Severe Local Anaesthetic
Toxicity. Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland.
Available at: http://www.aagbi.org/sites/default/files/la_toxicity_2010_0.
pdf. Accessed January 4, 2017.

61. Reference ID: 3958413. US Food and Drug Administration. Available at:
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2016/207648lbl.
pdf. Accessed August 7, 2017.

62. Fettiplace MR, Akpa BS, Rubinstein I, Weinberg G. Confusion about
infusion: rational volume limits for intravenous lipid emulsion during
treatment of oral overdoses. Ann Emerg Med. 2015;66:185–188.

63. Templin JS, Wylie MC, Kim JD, et al. Neosaxitoxin in rat sciatic block:

45. Tran DQ, Boezaart AP, Neal JM. Beyond ultrasound guidance for regional

anesthesiology. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2017;42:556–563.

Improved therapeutic index using combinations with bupivacaine, with and
without epinephrine. Anesthesiology. 2015;123:886–898.
